---
title: The role of EA in heathcare
date: '2019-10-13T00:00:00.000Z'
type: reveal
tag: []
---

There are many architecture frameworks that are used in the development of organization’s enterprise architecture, four top architecture frameworks are briefly defined as under:

--

**Zachman Framework**: This framework suggested a logical structure to categorize, arrange and depict the detailed picture of a firm. A primary objective of the Zachman framework is to create an infrastructure that supports a firm or organization in developing, integration, design, management and access organization’s information system.

--

**Federal Enterprise Architecture Framework (FEAF)**: The FEAF is composed by exercising the classification of five models which are known as reference models. These
 reference models listed below.
- Performance Reference model.
- Business Reference model. 
- Service component reference model. 
- Data Reference model.
- Technical Reference Model.

--

**Treasury Enterprise Architecture Framework (TEAF)**: This framework is inspired by *Zachman* and supports the *Treasury’s business affair*. The TEAF offers guidelines for developing and redesigning business methods in order to fulfill requirements of modern legislation in an expeditiously changing technology environment. TEAF describes four basic active
- enterprise architecture strategies 
- enterprise  architecture management process 
- enterprise architecture approach 
- development of an enterprise architecture repository.

--

**The Open Group Architecture Framework (TOGAF)**: It is a generic framework and, for this reason, any firm may employ the TOGAF freely to design EA. The TOGAF enables any organization to evaluate and build their appropriate architecture. The TOGAF is split in four categories 
- Business architecture
- Data architecture
- Application architecture
- Technical architecture

--

The essence of the TOGAF is the Architecture Development Method (ADM) and the Architecture Content Framework (Antunes, Jos ́ e Barateiro, Christoph Becker, Jos ́ e Borbinha and Ricardo Vieira, 2011). ADM address enterprise’s business and IT needs. ADM consists of a stepwise cyclic method to design the whole EA. 

Another important component of the TOGAF is foundation architecture; the architecture team can predict the current and future situation of the architecture.

===

ROLE OF EA IN HEALTHCARE

--

Healthcare organizations are confronting various issues; the major issue in these issues is 
- medical errors and providing medical services where doctors are inexperienced or absent. 
- The healthcare industry addresses the lack of interoperability and integration among systems; it will never get the advantages of an Electronic Medical Record (EMR). 
- Many healthcare organizations operate Electronic Medical Record systems independently. These systems are incapable to connect with other systems. The basic reason of incapability of these systems is different business procedures, IT/IS architecture.

--

There are several information and communication technology (ICT) launches for providing help to information system, but these are disjointed in design and implementations are in general not systematic.
- The Health Metrics Network (HMN)
- Conventional use of better information is linked with better healthcare results and a strong healthcare information system (HIS) is one important procedure for providing capacity.
- Encouragement of top country leaderships is essential for maintaining healthcare benefits and enabling healthcare information systems.

--

- Country implementation challenges and requirements carefully understood and addressed directly for a HIS to be successful.
- Stakeholder consensus and commitment are required to improve performance of the healthcare system and health policies.
- Long term strategic plan is needed for health information system strengthening

===

Enterprise architecture will help to explain the recent condition of a country’s healthcare information system, and provide assistance and steps to achieve growth with the passing of time, which countries could use to inform plans for healthcare information system investments.
- EA Integration in healthcare organizations
- Enterprise interoperability in healthcare organizations
- Unification principle
- Intersection principle
- Interlinking Principle

--

The IT/IS level problem is occurring when two different healthcare organizations are connected by using different IT applications/infrastructure. The business process level problems are overcome by using the Unified Enterprise Modelling Language (UEML) and the IT/IS level problems are solved by employing an Enterprise Service Bus (Victor Anaya and Angel Ortiz, 2005; Tu et al., 2012).

--

After the 1990s, the idea of enterprise integration has been converted into a new emerging concept of Enterprise interoperability (Hervé Panetto and J. Cecil, 2013).

===

Knowledge-based system is developed to incorporate medical knowledge and reasoning strategies into the automation of medical diagnosis. Knowledge-based medical diagnostic systems (KBMDS) is also a part of a healthcare system that support doctors, paramedical staff and patients in a disease diagnosis process.
KBMDS is a software that is developed by adopting artificial intelligence (AI) techniques.

--

The knowledge-based medical diagnostic systems were introduced in 1970s and their first proper application was launched in 1980s (Mrs. S. S. Gulavani and R. V. Kulkarni, 2009).

--

Some widely used systems,
- INTERNIST-I (Diagnose problems in general internal medicine)
- MYCIN (Blood infections)
- CADUCEUS (Diagnose 1000 diseases)
- QMR (Helps physicians to diagnose adult diseases)
- PUFF (Lungs disease)
- ATHENA (encourages blood pressure control and recommends guideline- concordant choice of drug therapy in relation to comorbid diseases)

--

- CEMS (Mental health decision support system)
- ERA (Web-based decision support and cancer referral system)
- GIDEON (For diagnosis of infectious diseases, tropical diseases, epidemiology, microbiology and antimicrobial chemotherapy)
- PERFEX (Diagnosis of heart disease)

===

COMPARISON OF TOGAF AND ZEAF

--

Zachman Framework has some deficiencies when a comparison is made with the TOGAF.
- i) It provides verified methods; these methods are developed by comprehensive research. 
- ii) It provides shared vocabulary and that’s why everyone can read and understand information in organizations. 
- iii) It gives a visual representation to business concepts. 

--

- iv) It provides knowledge about an organization and enables managers to make better informed decisions. 
- v) It ensures that IT solutions are aligned to the needs of the business. 
- vi) It increases data sharing, enhanced reliability of the solutions as well as easier maintenance.

--

Roger Sessions (Microsoft, 2007) compare TOGAF and ZEAF
- Methodology to categorize the different architectural artifacts (TOGAF better)
- Methodology to guide a step-by-step process for designing EA
- Instructions for building a set of reference models
- Focus on a technology that reduced expenses and increased income
- Practice guidance

--

- Governance guidance
- Guidance on effective autonomous separate sections of the organization which is used for managing complexity
- Catalogue management about architectural assets that can be reused in future
- Information availability

===

Saber Abdallah and Galal Hassan Galal-Edeen (2006) compare TOGAF and ZEAF
- Definition of Architecture and Understanding
- Process of Architecture
- Evolution of Architecture Support
- Standardization
- Knowledge-Based Architecture
- Drivers of Business
- Model of Business
- Visualization tool

===

Lise Urbaczewsk compares the TOGAF and the ZEAF on the basis of their different viewpoints and aspects.

--

Comparison by Views/Perspectives
- Planner
- Owner
- Designer
- Builder
- Subcontractor
- User

--

Comparison by Abstractions
- What
- How
- Where
- Who
- When
- Why

===

According to Leist, every framework has several strengths and different weaknesses and no framework covers all requirements regarding the basic elements of a method; the TOGAF, for example, does not have the detail of a Meta model while the MDA is used to describe the Meta model.
- Specification document
- Meta model
- Technique
- Procedure model

===

DISCUSSION AND FINDINGS

--

It is also observed that the Zachman is not an appropriate framework for designing a new architecture because of the absence of a step- by-step process.

The TOGAF is the best to develop an enterprise architecture model for Knowledge-Based Medical Diagnosis Systems because it provides a step-by-step process in the form of layered architectures.

--

The TOGAF divides enterprise architecture into four layered categories
- Business architecture
- Application architecture
- Data architecture
- Technical architecture

===

This study is simply based on analyzing two popular enterprise architecture frameworks. However, in the future, the study can be extended by the the comparing other frameworks with the TOGAF as well as designing an EA model for a knowledge-based medical diagnostic system, possibly by using ArchiMate modeling language tools which are an essential part of an open group architecture framework.
