---
title: Computer Networks
date: '2019-10-14T00:00:00.000Z'
type: reveal
tag: []
---

Network system administration is to a great degree a wide subject in data science which calculates itself regarding profundity and significance. Taken just, on the other hand, a network system is close to a framework by which one can handle components and send data to another.

--

Accordingly, the discriminating parameter of a network system is to measure *the data stream*.

--

One essential metric is the transmission capacity or *bandwidth*, or the greatest rate at which a system can move data over a line that partitions the hubs/nodes into two equivalent gatherings.

--

Generally, as essential for firmly coupled multiprocessing, the time needed to exchange a message between hubs is called the *latency*.

--

An extensive and consistent examination exertion devotes itself to enhance these two numbers, bringing about a tremendous scope of way to deal with network system outline.

===

Network Topologies, Types, and Design Strategies

--

Network Topologies
- Mesh Topology
- Star Topology
- Ring Topology
- Bus Topology
- Tree Topology

--

Mesh topology is preferred where dedicated connection is required and time is more important than infrastructure, cost of laying, and maintenance of physical or wireless media.

===

Network Types
- LAN
- MAN
- WAN
- Internetworks

--

LAN

--
```pug
div(style="font-size: 6vh")
  :markdown
    The following characteristics differentiate one LAN from another:
    - Topology: The geometric arrangement of devices on the network. For example, devices can be arranged in a ring or in a straight line.
    - Protocols: The rules and encoding specifications for sending data. The protocols also determine whether the network uses peer-to-peer (P2P) or client–server architecture.
    - Media: Devices can be connected by twisted-pair wire, coaxial cables, or fiber optic cables. Some networks communicate without connecting media altogether, instead, doing so through radio waves.
```
--

A LAN can be configured either as a client–server LAN or a P2P LAN
- Peer-to-Peer Model: P2P networks are the simplest and least expensive networks to set up.
- Client-Server Model: The most common LAN types used by companies today are the “client-server model,” since they consist of the server (storing the files and running applications) and the client machines (computers used by the workers).

--

MAN
- A system of LANs connected through telephone lines and radio waves is called as MAN.

--

WAN
- WAN technologies use multiplexers to connect local and metropolitan networks like the Internet.

--

Internetworks
- When two or more networks are connected, they become an Internetwork, or Internet. Individual networks are joined into Internetworks by the use of Internetworking devices. These devices include routers and gateways.

===

Design Strategies for Communications

--

The protocols must be agreed upon by all the manufacturers, i.e., standards are required. For instance, RS-232C is a standard protocol for transmission of a stream of bytes that is widely used for sending data between computers and peripherals such as printers and modems. TCP is a standard protocol used for reliable transmission of arbitrary data between computers in the Internet.

--

The logical communication between two computers can be implemented in three layers.
- The lowermost layer defines the electrical characteristics of the link, the representation of buts, and the mechanical details of connectors and cable.
- The middle layer handles the sending and reception of packets.
- At the highest layer is the protocol for actually transferring the complete file.

===

Layering of protocols serves another purpose: it is possible for different vendors to implement different layers and for these to interoperate provided they all conform to a standard layering. One such standard for layering is **the International Standards Organization (ISO) reference model for Open Systems Interconnection (OSI)**.

--

OSI Reference Model
- Application layer
- Presentation Layer
- Session Layer
- Transport Layer
- Network Layer
- Data Link Layer
- Physical Layer

--

Application layer: 
- The application layer is responsible for a set of functions commonly required by various applications. 
- Examples of some application layer protocols include HTTP, FTP, TELNET.
- Virtual terminal emulation and similar functionality are included in the list of responsibilities of the application layer.

--

Presentation Layer: 
- It is primarily concerned with the syntax and semantics of the information required to be transmitted over the network. 
- Examples of some of the activities of this layer include data or information encoding in a manner a priori agreed between the sending and receiving parties. For instance, an ASCII system talking to an EBCDIC system may use services of this layer.

--

Session Layer: 
- The session layer is responsible for establishment of one or more sessions between two or more users or applications working on different member systems of a network. 
- Examples of some of the activities of this layer include selective flow of traffic in either directions, session control by token circulation, and synchronization of status information, etc.

--
```pug
div(style="font-size: 6vh")
  :markdown
    Transport Layer: 
      - The transport layer is responsible for receiving the data from the upper layer, i.e., the session layer and dividing it into manageable chunks for the purpose of further processing and onward transmission to network layer after prefixing its own header to the processed data. 
      - At the other end, this operation is reversed when this layer receives data from the network layer and after due processing passes it on to its upper layer. 
      - Other activities of this layer include creation of network connections as per the transport connection requests by the upper layer.
```
--
```pug
div(style="font-size: 6vh")
  :markdown
    Network Layer: 
    - The network layer is responsible for receiving the data from the transport layer, process it for finding out the required resources, and divide the data into fragmented units. Thereafter, decide the route to be taken by the respective data units and pass the data to the lower (data link) layer after prefixing its own header to it. At the other end, this operation is reversed. 
    - Routing decision can be based on a fixed or static routing policy or a dynamic (situation dependent) routing policy. 
    - Other functions of the network layer include congestion control, address resolution, protocol translation, and resource usage accounting.
```
--
```pug
div(style="font-size: 6vh")
  :markdown
    Data Link Layer: 
    - The data link layer is responsible for receiving the data from the network layer, process it, insert the processed data into data frame, add control information to it by prefixing a header, and suffixing a trailer to the processed data to pass it on to the physical layer for actual transmission in signal form. 
    - Examples of some of the other activities of this layer include data link layer protocol translation in required cases, ensuring acceptably error-free transmission, flow control, traffic direction regulation, and media access control in case of shared media systems.
```
--
```pug
div(style="font-size: 6vh")
  :markdown
    Physical Layer: 
    - The physical layer is responsible for receiving the data from the data link layer, converting it into equivalent signal (representing the data in bits), and transmitting these signals in the desired manner over a shared or dedicated transmission link. 
    - Apart from the electrical characteristics, this layer is also concerned with the mechanical issues like connector dimensions, interpin distance, mechanical strength needed, etc. Issues like physical connection establishment, direction of transmission, frequency usage, and other procedural matters are under its purview.
```
===

Wireless Networking
- the origins of radio frequency-based wireless networking can be traced back to the University of Hawaii’s ALOHANET research project in the 1970s
- the key events that led to wireless networking becoming one of the fastest growing technologies of the early twenty first century have been the ratification of the IEEE 802.11 standard in 1997, and the subsequent development of interoperability certification by the Wi-Fi Alliance (formerly WECA).

--

The 802.11 standard stands as a major milestone in the development of wireless networking and the starting point for a strong and recognizable brand Wi-Fi.

--

other wireless networking technologies have followed a similar timeline, with the first IrDA specification being published in 1994, the same year when Ericsson started research on connectivity between mobile phones and accessories that led to the adoption of bluetooth by the IEEE 802.15.1 Working Group in 1999. 

===

Usage of Networking
- Remote Login and File Access
- Remote Printing
- Electronic Mail
- Information Access
- Storage Capacity
- Resource Sharing
- Economical Setup
- Performance Enhancement and Balancing

===

Challenges and Issues of Networking
- Quality of Service
- Connectivity, Manageability, and Scalability
- Network Security
- Network Congestion

--

Quality of Service
- IETF has advanced numerous administration models and components to meet distinctive QoS necessities, for example, IntServ/RSVP, DiffServ, traffic engineering, and QoS-based routing.

--

- IntServ gives three sorts of administration models: guaranteed service, controllable-load service, and committed rate service.
- IntServ cannot be deployed on a vast scale on the grounds that each system hub needs to store numerous streams state

--

- In this manner, DiffServ is advanced to defeat the confinement of IntServ, which is to give basic, adaptable, and separated administrations in Internet
- IntServ can be sent at the system edge or get to network to satisfy adaptable admission control and resource reservation. DiffServ works as a spine system of human body to satisfy productive information transmission.

--

Network Congestion
- The OpenDaylight project has given an open-source stage where individuals team up to build common software-defined networking infrastructure.
- Ericsson’s commitment to the joint effort is centered around extending this insight from the data center into the network system—giving a more incorporated and less-difficult improvement environment.

===

Future of Networking
