---
title: Introduction to Public Health Informatics
type: reveal
date: '2019-10-07T00:00:00.000Z'
tag: []
---

Learning outcomes
- Identify subdisciplines of informatics
- Differentiate public health informatics for other disciplines
- Discuss four principles that identify public health informatics

---

Informatics

--

Health + IT + people

---

Four principles that identify public health informatics (3F1O)

--

Focus on applications of information technology that promote the health of population, rather than individual

--

Focus on disease prevention, rather than treatment

--

Focus on preventive intervention at all vulnerable points in the causal chains

--

Operation within a governmental context, rather than private

---

Subdisciplines of biomedical and health informatics

--

- Bioinformatics (cell/molecular)
- Medical informatics (person)
- Public health informatics (population)

---

Common knowledge and skills of public health informatics

--

1. Vision and system planning
2. Health data standards and integration
3. Data privacy and security
4. Systems design and implementation
5. Visualization, analysis and report of health data

---

Explain the importance of informatics to improve public health practices

--

- Rapid spread of diseases \<==> Rapid communication
- Big data, genomic data, EHR systems
- Advances in information technology
  1. Mobile technology
  2. Telehealth
  3. Personalized medicine
  4. SaaS

---

Discuss challenges of public health informatics

--

1. Combine data from various sources
2. Data presentation for decision making
3. Confidentiality of data

---

Define the scope of public health informatics

--

1. Conceptualization
2. Design
3. Development
4. Deployment
5. Refinement
6. Maintenance
7. Evaluation

---

Introduction to public health informatics
- Define the concept of public health informatics and explain the aspects that it has in common with medical informatics.
- Understand the four principles that define, guide, and provide the context for the types of activities and challenges that comprise public health informatics and differentiate it from medical informatics.
- Describe the history, organization, purpose, and challenges of public health in the US.
- Explain how the four main drivers of change are affecting the future of public health informatics.
- Discuss the major developments that have increased the importance and immediate relevance of informatics to public health.

---

Describe the history, organization, purpose, and challenges of public health in Thailand.

---

History of public health

--

Pneumonic plague surveillance conducted by the Venetian Republic in the fourteenth century

--

The recording of vital events in the sixteenth century in the London Bills of Mortality

--

In the US, Massachusetts developed a postcard-based reporting system in 1874, which marks the beginning of US infectious disease reporting.

--

The Communicable Disease Center, precursor of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), was established in 1946.

--

The new center was an extension of the wartime agency MCWA (Malaria Control in War Areas), developed to combat malaria through mosquito control.

--

From those DDT-drenched roots grew today’s CDC, with its emphases on 
- working with states and other partners to monitor and prevent outbreaks; 
- maintain national health statistics; 
- preventing and controling infectious and chronic diseases, injuries, and environmental health hazards.

---

Public Health Strata in the United States
- public health agencies in the US are arranged into three strata – federal, state, and local.

--

Federal level
- HHS - US Department of Health and Human Services
- FDA - US Food and Drug Administration
- NIH - National Institutes of Health
- IHS - Indian Health Service
- SAMHSA - Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration
- HRSA - Health Resources and Services Administration

--

The CDC may be considered HHS’s primary federal public health agency
- Development and dissemination of prevention guidelines and policies.
- Distribution of federal funds to states for specific public health programs.
- Collaboration, representation, and leadership in the public health arena
- Assistance to other public health organizations, at their request. For example, to US states (Wisconsin, Arkansas, Louisiana, and Georgia), and Ethiopia.

--

State and Territory level
- Assisting local health departments (LHDs) with investigations such as outbreak investigations.
- Coordinating statewide initiatives and programs, such as statewide electronic laboratory reporting, vital statistics, immunization registries, etc.
- Setting state policy and legislation, such as state notifiable conditions. The Council of State and Territorial Epidemiologists (CSTE) maintains a State Reportable Conditions Assessment (SRCA).
- Distributing funds (often federal funds) to LHDs.

--

Local level
- county health departments, 
- metropolitan area health organizations, 
- tribal public health, and 
- regional collaboration organizations.

--

- LHDs often have the primary responsibility for investigating cases and outbreaks.
- Not all states have LHDs; some may perform all investigations at a state level.
- Many large metropolitan areas have health organizations that function at the level of an LHD. For example, **the New York City Department of Health and Mental Hygiene** gathers data and provides information on residents of New York City.

--

- The National Indian Health Board (NIHB) works with a variety of partners, including 
  - the Indian Health Service (IHS) and 
  - CDC, 
  - on public health projects such as the recent Traditional Foods Project and 
  - the Methamphetamine and Suicide Prevention Initiative (MSPI).
- Regional public health initiatives may adhere to 
  - the ten HHS-designated regions of the US or may 
  - constitute a response to local needs, such as **Alaska’s public health centers**.

---

In addition to governmental structure, public health is arranged into program areas based on activity and purpose. The Public Health Accreditation Board (PHAB) offers public health department accreditation options to tribal, state, local, and territorial public health departments in the US.

--

The CDC is arranged into centers, institutes, and offices that reflect focus on different public health concerns These include such examples as 
- the Office of Infectious Diseases, 
- National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health (NIOSH), 
- National Center for Environmental Health/Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry, and 
- Office of Surveillance, Epidemiology, and Laboratory Services.

---

The Purpose of Public Health

--

The Institute of Medicine’s 1988 report on public specifies that the “core functions of public health agencies at all levels of government are 
- assessment, 
- policy development, and 
- assurance”

--

The CDC National Public Health Performance Standards Program (NPHPSP) determined ten Essential Public Health Services  essential to all communities, listed as:

--

1. Monitor health status to identify and solve community health problems.
2. Diagnose and investigate health problems and health hazards in the community.
3. Inform, educate, and empower people about health issues.
4. Mobilize community partnerships and action to identify and solve health problems.
5. Developpoliciesandplansthatsupportindividualandcommunityhealthefforts.
6. Enforce laws and regulations that protect health and ensure safety.
7. Link people to needed personal health services and assure the provision of healthcare when otherwise unavailable.
8. Assure competent public and personal healthcare workforce.
9. Evaluate effectiveness, accessibility, and quality of personal and population-based health services.
10. Research for new insights and innovative solutions to health problems.

--

These ten essential services of public health harmonize well with the IOM’s three core functions (assessment, policy development, and assurance), and all are improved by the application of informatics.

--

Assessment includes collection and analysis of health data, as well as the critical step of distribution of information gained to the community: informatics can advance 
- the accuracy and security of health data collection, and 
- increase the value of knowledge distribution.

---

From the Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report (MMWR) list of ten highly-significant public health achievements in the US, it is easy to see that the principles of PHI must have been involved. The unordered list below includes some selected highlights of those achievements:

--

- Vaccination – worldwide eradication of smallpox, and elimination of poliomyelitis in the US
- Motor-vehicle safety – such as seat belt implementation, reduction in drunk driving
- Safer workplaces – reduction in occupational injuries and unsafe working conditions
- Control of infectious diseases – improved sanitation, improved therapies
- Decrease in coronary heart disease/stroke deaths – smoking cessation programs, improved treatment and detection
- Safer and healthier foods – food fortification, reduction in contamination
- Healthier mothers and babies – improvements in nutrition and healthcare access
- Family planning – contraception, STD prevention, and treatment
- Fluoridation of drinking water – reduced tooth decay
- Recognition of tobacco as health hazard – antismoking campaigns

---

Public health has significantly increased life expectancy. Since 1900, the average life expectancy in the US has increased 30 years, and a startling 25 of those years are attributed to public health initiatives.

--

In the twentieth century alone, smallpox killed around 300 million people. 

In 1977, a dedicated public health initiative brought about worldwide eradication of this disease. 

--

In the 1970s, a huge majority (88%) of US children had elevated levels of blood lead, 

By 1994, public health had reduced that percentage to only 4.4%.

---

Public Health’s Unique Challenges and the Promise of Public Health Informatics

--

Public health usually operates in a resource-scarce environment, dependent upon 

inconstant but always inadequate public funding.

--

- between 1980 and 2000, the number of public health workers per 100,000 Americans declined from 220 to 158; 
- around half of the public health workforce is nearing retirement age; and 
- four out of five public health employees lack formal public health training.
- public health must be cautious about committing resources to a program

---

In order for a condition to realistically be of interest to public health, it usually needs to match some degree of each of the following criteria

--

- severity – the condition/disease must be severe enough in its effects to warrant some type of intervention/monitoring; 
- preventability – the condition must be preventable or at least able to be mitigated by health interventions, behavioral modifications, etc.; and 
- prevalence – the condition must be prevalent enough in the population to warrant some type of intervention/monitoring

---

The various informatics specialty areas – for instance, nursing informatics and medical informatics – are distinguished from one another by the principles underlying their respective application domains (i.e., nursing and medicine), as well as by the differing nature and challenges of their informatics applications

---

These four principles define, guide, and provide the context for the types of activities and challenges that comprise this field:

---

The Future of Public Health Informatics

--

- Driver for Change: Health Reform
- Driver for Change: Advances in Information Technology
- Driver for Change: Big Data
- Driver: Disruptive Innovation

---

Driver for Change: Health Reform

--

The Health Information Technology for Economic and Clinical Health (HITECH) Act of 2009 was enacted as part of the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act (ARRA) to foster the adoption and meaningful use of health information technology.

--

In 2010, the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act (PPACA, or commonly, ACA) was signed; it seeks to change the very nature of clinical practice, in part by changing financial incentives that promote health and wellness versus pay-for-procedure reimbursement.

--

The HITECH Act incentivizes adoption of EHR technology by offering Medicare and Medicaid payment to healthcare providers and hospitals that use certified EHR systems to achieve *meaningful use*, a set of standards specified by the Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services (CMS).

--

Meaningful Use is planned to develop in three stages, as described on the HealthIT.gov site referenced above:

--

- Stage 1, 2011–2012: Data capture and sharing. This stage concentrates on capturing data electronically and in standardized format and reporting clinical qual- ity measures and public health information.
- Stage 2, 2014: Advance clinical processes. This stage emphasizes increased health information exchange (HIE) and e-prescribing, and incorporation of laboratory results.
- Stage 3, 2016: Improved outcomes. This stage is planned to lead to better outcomes through elevated quality, safety, and efficiency, and to improved population health.

---

Driver for Change: Advances in Information Technology

--

However, along with advances in capabilities come parallel advances in system hacking, identity theft, and other malicious intent. 
- The goals of privacy, 
- confidentiality, and 
- security have never before been so challenging or so critical.

---

Driver for Change: Big Data

--

As noted by IBM recently, “Every day, we create 2.5 quintillion bytes of data – so much that 90 % of the data in the world today has been created in the last 2 years alone”.

--

the inherent variability of the data; health data can be 
- structured, such as data from monitoring equipment and laboratory results, or 
- unstructured, such as medical transcription and imaging. 

The traditional Three V’s of Big Data – volume, velocity, and variety – can and should be supplemented by a fourth V, value.

---

Driver: Disruptive Innovation

--

Many of the disruptive innovations taking place in healthcare also will affect public health. A few examples of these innovations include:
- Mobile technology
- Telehealth
- Personalized medicine
- Personal health record (PHR)
- Open Access (OA)
- Gene patenting
- Software as a Service (SaaS)

---

Public health informatics has often found itself in the position of “pushing the broom” at the end of the parade, being brought in to solve problems such as non- interoperability or poor data quality

---

What are the main differences between public health informatics and other informatics fields?

---

Discuss the history of public health in the US. What do you think has been the most important factor in developing today’s public health infrastructure?

---

Of the top achievements of public health in the US, which do you think is most closely dependent upon informatics, and why?

---

Compare and contrast the functions performed by public health professionals and practitioners of traditional healthcare. How do they differ in their approach to (1) the individual, and (2) the community? To what parties are these two categories of professionals accountable for their actions, and how?

---

Discuss the drivers of change in public health informatics. Which do you think will have the greatest impact, and why?

---

Public health informatics (PHI) is one branch of the larger field of biomedical and health informatics (BMHI) (Hersh, BMC Med Inform Decis Mak 9:24, 2009)

--

Keywords

--

- Teleradiology 
- Telepathology 
- eHealth 
- Informatics 
- Biomedical informatics 
- Health informatics

--

- Imaging 
- Consumer health 
- Translational research 
- Health information management 
- Management information systems 
- Electronic medical record 
- Electronic health record 

--

- Personal health record 
- Health information exchange 
- Secondary use 
- Telemedicine 
- Evidence-based medicine 
- Evidence-based practice 
- Clinical epidemiology 
- Comparative effectiveness research

---

Definition and Context of Informatics

--

But certainly in the United States, the most prominent usage of it comes from the biomedical and health disciplines.

--

This author has defined informatics as the field concerned with optimal use of information, 
- often aided by the use of technology, 
- to improve individual health, health care, public health, and biomedical research [1].

--

The former School of Informatics at the State University of New York Buffalo defined informatics as a Venn diagram showing the intersection of people, information, and technology.

--

Friedman has defined a “fundamental theorem” of informatics, which states that informatics is more about using technology to help people do cognitive tasks better than about building systems to mimic or replace human expertise.

--

He has also described informatics as “cross-training,” bridging an application domain (such as public health or medicine) with basic information sciences.

--

In effect, he characterized informatics by what it is not, including analyzing large data sets, employment in circumscribed information technology (IT) roles, or routine work using a computer.

--

Collen penned in the 1990s a history of the early usage of the term in medicine, from its origination in Europe as somewhat synonymous to computer science to its more recent usage to imply computer science or IT applied to a specific domain.

--

Another early seminal document attempting to define it in the US came from Greenes and Shortliffe, who described it as “the rapidly developing scientific field that deals with the storage, retrieval, and optimal use of biomedical information, data, and knowledge for problem solving and decision making”.

--

Detmer et al. recently defined the discipline of clinical informatics in preparation for efforts at professional certification, somewhat similarly noting that the field transforms health care by “analyzing, designing, implementing, and evaluating information and communication systems that enhance individual and population health outcomes, improve patient care, and strengthen the clinician-patient relationship”.

---

The Sub-Disciplines of Informatics

--

Shortliffe has proposed that informatics proceeds along a continuum from the cellular and molecular (bioinformatics) to the person (medical or clinical informatics) to the population (public health informatics).

--

But there are other sub-disciplines of BMHI that do not fit neatly into this continuum:
- Imaging informatics
- nursing (nursing informatics), dentistry (dental informatics), pathology (pathology informatics), etc.
- Consumer health informatics – the field devoted to health informatics from a consumer view, which focused on applications such as personal health records (PHRs)
- Clinical research informatics – the use of informatics to facilitate clinical research, with increasing emphasis on translational research that aims to accelerate research findings into clinical practice.

---

Related Terminology of Informatics

--

*health information management (HIM)*, refers to the discipline that has historically focused on the management of medical records.
- HIM professionals have historically been educated at the associate or baccalaureate level, 
- whereas informaticians often come from clinical backgrounds, including those with doctoral degrees, such as MD, PharmD, etc.

--

Another term, information technology (IT), is generally used to describe computers and related technologies in operational settings. The academic discipline that underlies IT is computer science, which is often housed academically in engineering schools.

--

However, IT professionals also come from other backgrounds, including fields such as *management information systems (MIS)*, a field whose programs are usually in business schools.

--

Within IT and computer science are a heterogeneous array of people with varying skills, including *developers, programmers, engineers, architects, and support personnel*.

--

Although focused on clinical research informatics, a paper by Bernstam et al. describes how BMHI differs from IT academically and operationally in that setting, 
- with BMHI more focused on data and information of the field and IT more concerned with the underlying technology and its operations.

--

Another source of diverse terminology concerns the health record of the individual. When these records were first computerized, the term electronic medical record (EMR) was most commonly used. 
- However, this has mostly been supplanted by the term electronic health record (EHR), which implies a broader and more longitudinal collection of information about the patient.
- There is increasing interest in the personal health record (PHR), which usually refers to the patient-controlled aspect of the health record, which may or may not be tethered to one or more EHRs from health care delivery organizations.

--

There has been major investment in EHRs in the US since 2009, when the Health Information Technology for Clinical and Economic Health (HITECH) Act was included as part of the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act (ARRA, also known as the economic stimulus bill).

--

The HITECH program is administered by the Office of National Coordinator for Health IT (ONC), an agency within the US Department of Health and Human Services.

--

Related to EHR growth is interest in *health information exchange (HIE)*, which is the exchange of health information for patient care across traditional business boundaries in health care and was also funded through the HITECH Act.

--

Even many health care organizations that have exemplary *health information technology (HIT) systems* have difficulty providing patient information to other entities where the patient may receive care, but an increasingly mobile population needs to have “data following the patient.”

--

HIE is actually but one example of what is sometimes called *secondary use* or *re-use* of clinical data, where data from clinical settings is used for other applications such as quality assurance, clinical research, and public health.

--

Another broad set of terms important to BMHI are the “tele-” terms. The two most widely used terms are *telemedicine*, which refers to the delivery of health care when the participants are separated by time or distance, and *telehealth*, which has more of a focus on direct interaction with health on information and communications technology (ICT).

--

As with informatics, the “tele-” terms sometimes reflect medical specialties in which they are applied, e.g., teleradiology and telepathology.

--

A somewhat related term is eHealth. An entire systematic review has been carried out around definitions of eHealth, which is defined as centering around 
- two broad themes (health and technology) and 
- six narrower ones (commerce, activities, stakeholders, outcomes, place, and perspectives).

--

Another area important to BMHI is evidence-based medicine (EBM). 
- Some use the term evidence-based practice (EBP), which advocates that health care decisions be made using the best available scientific evidence with those who receive care, informed by the knowledge of those who provide care, and within the context of available resources for that care. 
- EBM and EBP are usually described to be part of the larger discipline of *clinical epidemiology*.

--

A new term to emerge related to EBM is *comparative effectiveness research (CER)*, which has been defined as “research studies that compare one or more diagnostic or treatment options to evaluate effectiveness, safety or outcomes”.

--

There is an emerging consensus of methodologies for CER that focuses on research that is patient-centered and has practical and actionable clinical outcomes.

---

The Value of Informatics

--

A great deal of research does show that informatics, when properly applied, can contribute to the “triple aim” of improved health, improved health care, and reduced health care costs.

--

Most studies of the value of informatics have come from the health care setting, which makes it challenging for PHI and other sub-disciplines to demonstrate value scientifically in their settings.

--

A good deal of the evidence for the value of BMHI is summarized in three successive systematic reviews.

The first systematic review to critically analyze all informatics evaluation studies to date was published in 2006. A total of 257 studies met the inclusion criteria. Most studies addressed decision support systems or EHRs.
- The review concluded that evidence for the value of BMHI was demonstrated most prominently in three areas: 
  - increased adherence to guideline-based care, 
  - enhanced surveillance and monitoring, and 
  - decreased medication errors. 
- The primary clinical domain of these improvements was preventive health. 
- The major efficiency benefit shown in the studies was decreased utilization of care. 
- Data on another efficiency measure, time utilization, were mixed. 
- There was limited empirical cost data in the identified research.

--

A second systematic review was published in 2009. In this review, 179 studies met the inclusion criteria.
- This review found comparable benefits to the previous systematic review that came from both EHRs and HIT systems designed to run independently from EHRs, but little formal evaluation of other types of applications. 
- There were somewhat fewer relevant studies from the health IT leader organizations.

--

These two previous reviews were updated using the same methodology in 2011. These authors reviewed the literature in a similar manner to the previous reviews and found that 92 % of the recent articles on health IT reached conclusions that were overall positive.
- These authors also found that the benefits of health IT were beginning to emerge in smaller practices and organizations, as well as in large organizations that had been early adopters.
- However, they also noted that dissatisfaction with EHRs among some providers was still high and a barrier to achieving value. 
- They concluded that the need for studies documenting the challenging aspects of implementing health IT and how those challenges might be addressed were critically needed.

--

Another important component of the value of BMHI is its workforce.
- The HITECH Act also stipulated the development of short-term training programs and related activities to match the needs generated by the incentives for EHR adoption.
- ONC developed its Workforce Development Program by surveying the research lit- erature and convening a workshop of experts in 2009.

--

- Based on the research literature, it was estimated that a workforce of approximately 51,000 professionals would be required to help eligible hospitals and professionals achieve meaningful use of the EHR.
- Adding the opinions of experts, ONC determined that professionals in 12 workforce roles would be required.
- They believed that these roles could be grouped into three categories.
  - The first category would be a wave of personnel who would be mobile in nature, moving from site-to-site implementing EHR systems. 
  - They would be followed by more permanent staff that would maintain and support the implemented EHR systems. 
  - A third category would consist of clinical and public health informatics experts who would manage, evaluate, educate, and perform further research and development of these systems.

--

Half of these workforce roles were designated for training in 6-month certificate programs in community colleges, while the other half would require 1–2 years in university-based programs.

--

The ONC Workforce Development Program rolled out in late 2009 consisted of four specific programs to train the workforce roles
- Community College Consortia - funded to offer 6-month certificate programs in the first six workforce roles
- Curriculum Development Centers - One university was additionally designated the National Training and Dissemination Center (NTDC), tasked with developing the Web site for dissemination of the materials and carrying out training activities for community colleges.
- Competency Examination
- University-based Training (UBT) programs

--

Although the focus of the HITECH Act is on clinical informatics, there are parts that are relevant to PHI. The curriculum being developed by the CDCs does include materials that cover aspects of PHI. 
- In addition, the UBT program includes a workforce role that is devoted to PHI leaders.

--

One shortcoming of many educational programs in BMHI has been their lack of development in PHI.

--

Another means for ramping up the workforce is through shorter courses, more akin to continuing education than formal degree programs. 
- One approach has been the 10 × 10 (“ten by ten”) program of the American Medical Informatics Association (AMIA). Although somewhat more focused on clinical informatics, one offering of the program has specifically focused on PHI.

---

Choose a health-related problem to apply biomedical and health informatics and describe what sub-discipline(s) of informatics is/are involved.

---

Select an information system application in a health-related discipline and distinguish the application of informatics from other aspects of the health-related problem.

---

Choose an application of informatics and find or describe the evidence supporting the answer to the question being studied.

---

Select a public health problem that requires data and/or information from information systems outside the public health system and describe how that/ those applications would interact with the public health information systems.

---

How might public health informatics leverage the large investment in HIT workforce to more efficiently and effectively train public health informaticians?

---

Measurement and public health

--

“Nothing exists until it is measured” the physicist Niels Bohr famously stated in 1930. He was referring to quantum mechanics, but the idea is also relevant to public health.

--

The definition of public health suggested by Beaglehole et al. as “collective action for sustained population-wide health improvement” presupposes the ability to measure and monitor the health of populations.

Epidemiology, demography and biostatistics are the key disciplines of public health.

--

The work of John Snow during the cholera epidemics that ravaged London in the mid-1800s is an early example of an epidemiological investigation. 
- Snow’s groundbreaking work was made possible by the registers of births and deaths maintained by local authorities in every English parish from the early 1880s.
- Thanks to the almost universal coverage of death registration in countries such as Denmark, England and Wales, the Netherlands, Norway and Sweden, the study of changing patterns of death became possible during the nineteenth century and led directly to the development of the endeavour of public health

--

A century and a half on, comprehensive registration of deaths and their causes is undertaken in some 78 countries covering around one-third of the world’s population.

--

In low-income countries, efforts to better document and count basic demographic events have increased over the past two decades.

--

Some 150 countries now produce estimates of child mortality based on empirical data collected in the previous 5 years.

--

Population-based surveys have become the predominant mode for collection of data on health and progress is being tracked using indicators measurable through surveys. Examples include 
- the 30 cluster-sample surveys of the Expanded Programme on Immunization (EPI) and 
- the family planning and maternal and child health-oriented Demographic and Health Surveys (DHS).

--

A basic prerequisite of any health programme is its ability to state unequivocally how many deaths it will avert and what proportion of the global burden of disease it will address.
- To fill missing data gaps, there has been a proliferation of model-based approaches to generating global, regional and national estimates of mortality, morbidity and burden of disease

---

Health information systems

--

Counting deaths is one component of the health information system, an “integrated effort to collect, process, report and use health information and knowledge to influence policy-making, programme action and research”

--

The health information system is heavily biased towards quantitative data — descriptions of health status and mortality of populations over time, analysis of causation of health problems, quantification of associations between health outcomes and risk or protective factors, and assessment of the effectiveness of public health in- terventions

--

The word “system” implies a connected whole or organized process. In practice, most country health information systems lack such cohesion, having developed in a piecemeal way, fashioned by administrative, economic, legal or donor pressures and are invariably highly complex.

--

One way of simplifying the issue is to describe the dimensions of demand: 
- who needs data and for what? 
- of supply: the tools and methods available to generate the needed information; 
- and of level: the level of the system at which data are generated and used.

--

In terms of demand, the domains that the health infor- mation system should address include:
- health determinants (socioeconomic, environmental behavioural and genetic factors) and the contextual and legal environments within which the health system operates;
- inputs to the health system and related processes including policy and organization, health infrastructure, facilities and equipment, costs, human and financial resources and health information systems;
- the performance or outputs of the health system such as availability, quality and use of health information and services;
- health outcomes (mortality, morbidity, disability, well-being, disease outbreaks and health status); and
- health inequities in determinants, coverage and use of services, and outcomes, including key stratifiers such as sex, socioeconomic status, ethnic group and geographical location.

--

A range of data generation methods is available including health facility data, administrative returns, household surveys, censuses, vital registration, national health accounts and health research.

--

Matching the data item or indicator with the most appropriate and cost-effective tool for generating it is an essential function of the health information system, but is not always straightforward. 
- Discrepancies can arise when different data collection methods are used for the same indicator.
- However, the two sources use different tools to measure the same thing and tend to contain systematic biases in one or the other direction. Where the distinction is not clearly understood, confusion and contradiction can arise.

--

However, during the technical discussions underpinning the development of the Health Metrics Network (see below), there was consensus that all countries should aspire to a mix of the data-generation approaches described in Box 1.

--

The availability of appropriately trained human resources with 
- analytical, 
- numerical and 
- statistical skills is critical.

--

The health information system is part of both 
- the health system and 
- the wider statistical system.

--

Accountability for health-related statistics is often distributed across different line ministries (e.g. ministries of employment, agriculture and education) or agencies

--

Countries vary in the extent to which there are 
- good working links between ministries of health and national statistics offices, 
- notwithstanding the central role of the ministry of health as a generator of data and, 
- perhaps more importantly, as a primary user of data for public health action.

--

Although populists argue that there should be no data collection other than at the level at which the data will be used, in practice, things are not so simple. 

--

For example, the census is nationally planned, but 
- data are generated from individuals and 
- the data are analysed and used at both the national and subnational levels.

National household surveys aggregate data collected from individuals at the national level, but these data cannot generally be disaggregated to the community or even the district level. 
- Surveillance for human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) or other notifiable diseases generates information that is used at the national and subnational levels.

--

Although the data requirements for patient care, system man- agement and policy-making are somewhat different they are also linked along a continuum (Fig. 1).

--

This continuum from patient care to strategic management implies that not everything needs to be known at every level of the system. 
- The quantity and detail of data needed is generally greater at lower levels of the system, 
- where decisions on the care of individuals are made, than at higher levels where broader policy-making takes place.

--

- Too often, lower level managers are required to report vast quantities of data to higher levels but rarely receive any feedback. 
- At the same time, the information overload at higher levels is such that the data are in practice seldom used effectively.

---

We know what we don’t know

--

The failings of health information systems have been brought into sharp focus by the Millennium Development Goals (MDGs) which have a strong health component.

--

Although the MDGs have been widely endorsed as a framework for measuring development progress, in practice, few countries have sufficiently developed health information systems to permit regular monitoring
- For example, several of the MDG targets are worded in terms of reductions in cause-specific mortality, which few developing countries are able to report.

--

Where country data are available, they are often based on different definitions, sources and methodologies with a resulting loss of comparability both between countries and over time.

--

Statements as to whether countries are “on track” or “off track” are largely based on informed opinion, extrapolations and estimates
- For example, only 23 developing countries have two or more data points over time for maternal mortality
- Because of problems such as these, many indicators commonly cited are actually based on predictive models rather than on empirical data.

---

Money — necessary but not sufficient

--

Certainly, establishing sustained and comprehensive systems of vital registration is an expensive, long-term proposition that carries little appeal for governments with short time horizons. *Yet many European countries set up their registers of births and deaths well before they became economically powerful and a number of low- and middle-income developing countries have successful vital registration systems (Cuba, the Islamic Republic of Iran, Malaysia and Sri Lanka).*

--

In any case, there is evidence that significant financial resources are being directed towards the generation of health information in developing countries. 
- It is estimated that approximately US$ 1.25–2 billion are spent each year on different aspects of health information, of which 
  - around US$ 0.75–1 billion is spent by low-income and lower-middle-income countries and 
  - some US$ 0.5–1 billion by global organizations (McKinsey & Co., unpublished data, 2003).

--

The problem is that the money is invested in a fragmented, duplicative and uncoordinated manner.

--

The extent of overlap is particularly evident in the area of household surveys and is not confined to the health sector.

Over the past 20 years, national capacity to collect and process data has been strengthened, data dissemination has improved, and compliance with international standards has increased, largely thanks to international survey programmes. 

<small>(These survey programmes include the Living Standards Measurement Study (LSMS) (the World Bank); Integrated Survey/Priority Survey (IS/PS) (the World Bank); Demographic and Health Survey (DHS) (United States Agency for International De- velopment (USAID)/Macro-International Inc.); Multiple Indicators Cluster Survey (MICS) (United Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF)); Core Welfare Indicators Questionnaire (CWIQ) (the World Bank); Labor Force Survey/Child Labor Survey (LFS/CLS) (ILO) and the World Health Survey WHS (WHO)).</small>

--

Because few developing countries have the financial and technical resources to implement large-scale survey programmes without external support, timing and content are to a large extent *donor driven*.

---

Capacity matters

--

Statistical capacity-building has been identified as a core need by many countries and the efforts of 
- the PARIS21 initiative (10) and 
- The World Bank STATCAP programme (11) are intended to remedy the situation.
- Both the USAID-supported DHS and 
- the UNICEF-supported MICS pay explicit attention to local capacity-building for data production and analysis.

--

Within the health sector itself, the need to build capacity for health information is often overlooked.
- The need for people with numeric and statistical skills to generate and analyse data is rarely mentioned in analyses of human resource requirements
- The assumption seems to be that health-care workers can take on the duties of health information officer
- Yet providers are understandably reluctant to divert their attention from patient care to data recording

--

Recent changes in health policy and practice have added to the capacity shortfall.
- Health sector reform generally comprises decentralization of decision-making and resource allocation to the district level, 
- yet neither the tools nor the capacities for information generation and analysis at this level have been sufficiently developed.

--

Where capacity exists, it is largely concentrated centrally; the national level focus of the MDGs exacerbates this tendency.

---

Division of responsibility

--

Data on determinants of health, on risk and protective factors, and on the consequences of ill-health are often to be found outside the health sector, for example, in agriculture, labour, education, water and sanitation.

--

A further complication results from the fragmented nature of the health sector. 
- Where the health care model is that of public provision and public financing, ensuring data flows is a relatively simple matter. But few countries have this “pure” state-controlled model.
- In most settings, public and private provision and financing coexist. Generating good data in such mixed systems can be a challenge.
- In theory, the regulatory authorities should oversee information reporting. In practice, regulatory power is a theoretical construct rather than a practical tool.

--

Responsibility is further diluted as an unintended consequence of donor actions.
- donors often support and implement their own data collection platforms
- Anxiety about the availability and quality of data reported by individual countries can fuel the drive for the establishment of independent bodies primarily concerned with global monitoring
- The result is separate and parallel mechanisms that respond to donor requirements rather than to the needs of country decision-makers
- Countries perceive this as an externally driven process, designed to meet donor needs and of little relevance to country action
- Development partners have become more sensitive to this problem in recent years and have made greater efforts to involve country partners in modelling and projection efforts, for example in the production of national estimates of HIV prevalence.

---

A failure of imagination

--

Resources, capacity and responsibility address the data supply side of the health information equation. Equally important, but less scrutinized, is the demand side. Who needs the data and what do they need them for?

--

In practice, decision-making in health is all too often based on political opportunism, expediency or donor demand. 
- There is a growing awareness that this leads to inefficient and ineffective use of resources. 
- Increasing emphasis on results-based management and performance-based funding is focusing minds on the need for sound data generated through reliable and transparent systems.

--

Data for decision-makers are clearly important, but 
- the circle of stakeholders for health-related information is much larger. 
- Access to health care and to the benefits of scientific knowledge are human rights which encompass also the right to sound health information. 
- The public has the right to know the status of public health. Communities have the right to know why people die before their time, why they get ill, what care is available and how they can protect themselves.
- Strengthening health information systems is also about imagining and creating a better world for all.

---

Health Metrics Network

--

- The United Nations Statistics Division supports countries in implementing the census and vital registration according to internationally agreed standards
- WHO provides technical guidance on the use of mortality and morbidity classifications
- and on the establishment of disease surveillance and response programmes

--

Attention has been paid in recent years to ways of making better use of routine service statistics
- UNICEF has established a multi-country survey programme to monitor child health
- SAID and other bilateral donors are investing substantial and growing amounts in Demographic and Health Surveys, and disease surveillance and response
- New institutions and partnerships such as the Global Fund to Fight AIDS, Tuberculosis and Malaria, and the Global Alliance for Vaccination and Immunization (GAVI) offer sig- nificant new resources for health information

---

What has been missing in these efforts has been an overall vision of a comprehensive health information system and the interlocking of its various component parts.

--

In 2003, a group of stakeholders came together to devise innovative solutions to the health information conundrum. Discussions resulted in a plan for the way forward, to be implemented through a new global collaboration called the Health Metrics Network, with a significant injection of venture capital from the Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation.
- This is the first global health initiative to have focused not on a specific disease but on a core component of the health system on which progress in disease-focused efforts is dependent.

---

- We learn about the costs of different ways of generating key indicators in the United Republic of Tanzania. 
- We learn how China is working to improve cause of death attribution. 
- The paper from South Africa describes the challenges of introducing data production and use into health facilities in settings with little tradition of using data for decision-making. 
- Other papers address specific technical challenges such as how to extend coverage of vital registration systems in resource-constrained settings where deaths generally occur at home and how to deal with the striking lack of data on health inequalities.

---

It is not because countries are poor that they cannot afford good health information; it is because they are poor that they cannot afford to be without it. Good examples exist of the use of data for evidence-based decision-making leading to better health
